>> Woodruff: THE JULY JOBS
REPORT PAINTED A LACKLUSTER
PICTURE OF THE U.S. ECONOMY.
162,000 JOBS WERE ADDED, BUT
THAT WAS FEWER THAN EXPECTED.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, TWO
TAKES ON THE U.S. EMPLOYMENT
SITUATION.
FIRST, PAUL SOLMAN HAS OUR
OVERVIEW OF TODAY'S NUMBERS.
>> Woodruff: AND A NEW REPORT
SAYS STATES SHOULD DO MORE TO
HELP PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
FIND WORK.
WE TALK TO THE GOVERN DRIORVING
THE EFFORT, DELAWARE DEMOCRAT
JACK MARKELL.
>> Brown: THEN, THE STATE
DEPARTMENT ISSUED A GLOBAL
TRAVEL ALERT TODAY, WARNING OF
POSSIBLE TERROR ATTACKS.
MARGARET WARNER EXPLAINS WHAT'S
AEHIND THE CONCERN THAT AL QDA
MIGHT STRIKE AGAIN.
>> Woodruff: ASIA IS CLAMORING
FOR MORE AMERICAN COAL, BUT THE
INFRASTRUCTURE IS NOT THERE TO
MEET THE GROWING DEMAND.
WE LOOK AT THE DEBATE OVER
BRINGING MORE TRAINS AND SHIPS
TO THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST TO
BOOST EXPORTS WHILE PROTECTING
THE ENVIRONMENT.
>> WE DON'T THINK IT'S AN
EITHER/OR PROPOSITION.
WE THINK THAT YOU CAN DEVELOP
FAMILY WAGE JOBS AND BE GOOD
STEWARDS AND PROTECT THE
ENVIRONMENT.
>> WE HAVE OUR FISH, WE HAVE OUR
SALMON, WE HAVE OUR CLEAN AIR.
WE'LL LOSE THAT.
THAT'SOSIN LG TO ME.
>> Brown: A NEW SURVEY FINDS
THAT AMERICANS OF DIFFERENT
RACES HAVE VERY DIFFERENT LEVELS
OF OPTIMISM ABOUT THEIR ECONOMIC
FUTURE.
RAY SUAREZ DIGS INTO THE
SURPRISING RESULTS.
>> Woodruff: DAVID BROOKS AND
RUTH MARCUS ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
>> BrownAND : HOW DO YOU SEND  A
SHIP MILES OFF COURSE, WITHOUT
TOUCHING ITS STEERING WHEEL?
FOOL ITS G.P.S. SYSTEM.
WE EXAMINE NEW RESEARCH THAT
SHOWS THE VULNERABILITY OF
SATELLITE NAVIGATION SYSTEMS.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Brown: UNEMPLOYMENT IS DOWN,
BUT JOB GROWTH STILL LEAVES A
LOT TO BE DESIRED.
THAT'S THE UPSHOT OF JULY'S JOBS
DATA FROM THE LABOR DEPARTMENT.
THE "NEWSHOUR'S" ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN HAS
OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: TODAY'S REPORT
SUGGESTED THAT THE ECONOMIC
RECOVERY MAY BE SLOWING DOWN.
EMPLOYERS ADDED ONLY 162,000 NEW
JOBS LAST MONTH, 23,000 LESS
THAN ECONOMIC FORECASTERS
CONSENSUS PREDICATION.
THE NEW JOBS TOTAL WAS THE
LOWEST SINCE MARCH.
MOREOVER, THE GOVERNMENT REVISED
JOB GROWTH FOR MAY AND JUNE,
DOWN BY 26,000.
AS FOR THE NEW JOBS, MOST WERE
IN LOWER-PAYING INDUSTRIES LIKE
RETAIL, HOTELS, AND RESTAURANTS.
EVEN THOUGH INFLATION CONTINUES
TO RISE, THE AVERAGE HOURLY WAGE
ACTUALLY DROPPED BY TWO CENTS,
THE FIRST DECLINE IN WAGES SINCE
LAST OCTOBER AND THE MOST SINCE
LATE 2011.
OVERALL, THE ECONOMY HAS CREATED
NEARLY 200,000 JOBS A MONTH
SINCE THE START OF THE YEAR.
AND WHILE THOSE AREN'T EXACTLY
TERRIBLE NUMBERS, THEY DON'T
REPRESENT ROBUST GROWTH AFTER A
DEEP RECESSION, ESPECIALLY WITH
THE WORKING AGE POPULATION
GROWING BY 200,000 A MONTH, AS
IT DID IN JULY.
HEIASDI SHIERHOLZ OF THE
ECONOMIC POLICY INSTITUTE POINTS
OUT, EVEN AT 200,000 A MONTH, IT
WILL TAKE MUCH LONGER THAN MANY
REALIZE TO REDUCE UNEMPLOYMENT
SIGNIFICANTLY.
>> IF WE CONTINUE WITH THAT PACE
OF JOB GROWTH, GOING FORWARD, WE
GET A LITTLE LESS THAN 200,000
JOBS A MONTH, EVERY SINGLE
MONTH, INDEFINITELY, WE WON'T
FILL THE JOBS GAP FOR ANOTHER
FIVE YEARS.
>> Reporter: TODAY'S
ANNOUNCEMENT CAME ON THE HEELS
OF ANOTHER LACKLUSTER REPORT
THAT SHOWED THE U.S. GROSS
DOMESTIC PRODUCT GREW ONLY
SLIGHTLY LAST QUARTER BY 1.7%.
TODAY'S SUPPOSEDLY GOOD NEWS WAS
THAT THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE SLID
TO 7.4% FROM 7.6%, MARKING A
FOUR-AND-A-HALF YEAR LOW.
THAT'S PARTLY DUE TO WORKERS
FINDING NEW OPPORTUNITIES IN AN
IMPROVING LABOR MARKET.
BUT SOME OF THAT DECLINE CAN BE
ATTRIBUTED TO THE SHRINKING SIZE
OF THE NATION'S WORKFORCE AS
MORE BABY BOOMERS, 10,000 OF
THEM A DAY REACHING THE FULL
SOCIAL SECURITY AGE OF 66,
AND, SAYS SHIERHOLZ, THERE'S
ANOTHER REASON THE UNEMPLOYMENT
RATE HAS BEEN DROPPING.
>> THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE RIGHT
NOW IS VASTLY OVERSTATING THE
IMPROVEMENT IN THE LABOR MARKET,
IN THE RECOVERY, BECAUSE WE HAVE
SO MANY WORKERS WHO HAVE DROPPED
OUT OF THE LABOR FORCE, OR NEVER
ENTERED IT BECAUSE JOB
OPPORTUNITIES ARE SO WEAK.
>> Reporter: JOB OPPORTUNITIES
AS ESPECIALLY WEAK IN
MANUFACTURING, WHICH SHOWED NO
JOB GROWTH IN JULY.
FACTORY JOBS HAVE REMAINED AT A
STANDSTILL FOR A YEAR NOW.
THE NUMBERS FOR BOTH LONG-TERM
UNEMPLOYMENT AND PART-TIME
WORKERS LOOKING FOR FULL-TIME
JOBS WERE UNCHANGED IN JULY.
>> Woodruff: WE CONTINUE OUR
LOOK AT THE EMPLOYMENT PICTURE
WITH GOVERNOR MARKELL'S CALL TO
INCREASE JOBS FOR THOSE WITH A
DISABILITY.
ALSO AHEAD ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
THE STATE DEPARTMENT WARNS OF A
POSSIBLE TERRORIST ATTACK; THE
EXPORTS; SURPRISING RACIAL
DIVIDES OVER ECONOMIC OPTIMISM;
BROOKS AND MARCUS ANALYZE THE
WEEK'S NEWS AND FOOLING G.P.S.
SYSTEMS.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: THE JOBS REPORT SENT
WALL STREET LOWER AT FIRST, BUT
IN THE END, STOCKS MANAGED SMALL
GAINS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
ADDED 30 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,658.
THE NASDAQ ROSE NEARLY 14 POINTS
TO CLOSE AT 3,689.
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW GAINED
JUST OVER HALF A PERCENT.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 2%.
THE DEFENSE RESTED TODAY IN
BOSTON, IN THE MURDER AND
RACKETEERING TRIAL OF JAMES
"WHITEY" BULGER.
THE REPUTED FORMER UNDERWORLD
BOSS OPTED NOT TO TESTIFY.
INSTEAD, HE TOLD THE FEDERAL
COURT JUDGE: "AS FAR AS I'M
CONCERNED, THIS IS A SHAM."
BULGER IS ACCUSED IN THE MURDERS
OF 19 PEOPLE, AMONG OTHER
CRIMES.
CLOSING ARGUMENTS ARE SET FOR
MONDAY, AND THE JURY IS EXPECTED
TO GET THE CASE ON TUESDAY.
THE ITALIAN COALITION GOVERNMENT
INITIALLY STRUGGLED TODAY TO
DEAL WITH FALLOUT FROM SILVIO
BERLUSCONI'S TAX FRAUD
CONVICTION.
THE COUNTRY'S SUPREME COURT
UPHELD THE FORMER PRIME
MINISTER'S FOUR-YEAR PRISON
SENTENCE ON THURSDAY.
THE 76-YEAR-OLD MEDIA
BILLIONAIRE IALSO IS LIKELY TO
LOSE HIS SEAT IN PARLIAMENT.
TODAY, PRIME MINISTER ENRICO
LETTA PLAYED DOWN PROSPECTS THAT
BERLUSCONI'SUPPO SRTERS MIGHT
BOLT FROM THE GOVERNING
COALITION.
>> I AM FULLY AWARE THAT THIS IS
A DELICATE MOMENT, POLITICALLY.
I SAID YESTERDAY AND I REPEAT IT
NOW, I AM A PERSON WHO PUTS
ITALY BEFORE ANYTHING ELSE.
IF THERE IS SOMEONE WHO WANTS TO
PUT OTHER PRIORITIES FIRST, THEN
I THINK IT IS IMPORTANT AT THIS
TIME TO HAVE CLARITY ON WHAT
THOSE PRIORITIES ARE.
FIRST OF ALL COMES THE COUNTRY,
FIRST OF ALL IS ITALY.
>> Holman: BERLUSCONI CONDEMNED
THE COURT RULING, BUT IT IS
UNLIKELY HE WILL SERVE ACTUAL
JAIL TIME.
INSTEAD, HE'S LIKELY TO DO A
YEAR OF COMMUNITY SERVICE OR A
YEAR OF HOUSE ARREST.
IN EGYPT, THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
ORGANIZED NEW MASS MARCHES
DESPITE GOVERNMENT WARNINGS SUCH
GATHERINGS WOULD BE BROKEN UP.
SUPPORTERS OF DEPOSED FORMER
PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI MARCHED
TO THE MILITARY INTELLIGENCE
HEADQUARTERS IN CAIRO.
THEY ALSO STARTED A NEW SIT-IN
AT THE AIRPORT.
BUT AMID THE PROTESTS, STATE
T.V. ANNOUNCED POLICE WILL
BLOCKADE EXISTING SIT-INS.
THE INTERIM CABINET HAS WARNED
THE CAMP SITES WILL BE
DISBANDED-- ONE WAY OR THE
OTHER.
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT REFUSED
TODAY TO STAY AN ORDER THAT
CALIFORNIA RELEASE 10,000 STATE
PRISON INMATES.
A LOWER FEDERAL COURT REQUIRED
THE RELEASE BY YEAR'S END, TO
EASE CROWDING.
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN ARGUED THE
STATE NEEDED MORE TIME TO FIND
ALTERNATIVES AND LETTING OUT
MORE PRISONERS EARLY WILL
JEOPARDIZE PUBLIC SAFETY.
THE STATE'S 33 PRISONS ARE
REPORTED TO BE AT 150% OF
CAPACITY.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: AND WE RETURN TO
THE JOBS STORY WITH A LOOK AT
HOW DIFFICULT THE LABOR MARKET
IS FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
AND WHAT CAN BE DONE ABOUT IT.
ESTIMATES SHOW THAT OF THE 54
MILLION AMERICANS WITH A
DISABILITY, JUST 20% ARE
EMPLOYED OR SEEKING A JOB.
A NEW REPORT OUT TODAY HAS
RECOMMENDATIONS TO IMPROVE THOSE
PROSPECTS.
IT COMES FROM DELAWARE GOVERNOR
JACK MARKELL, THE CURRENT
CHAIRMAN OF THE NATIONAL
GOVERNOR'S ASSOCIATION.
I SPOKE WITH HIM A SHORT TIME
AGO.
GOVERNOR JACK MARKELL, THANK YOU
FOR TALKING WITH US.
>> Pelley: GOOD TO BE WITH
YOU, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> SO WE KNOW FROM TODAY'S
UNEMPLOYMENT REPORT THE JOBS
PICTURE IS IMPROVING BUT IT'S 12
MILLION AMERICANS OUT OF WORK
WHO WOULD LIKE TO HAVE A JOB.
WHY FOCUS ON PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES?
>> THERE ARE SO MANY COMPANIES
AROUND THE COUNTRY THAT ARE
LOOKING FOR PEOPLE WITH
PARTICULAR SKILLS AND THE FACT
IS WE'VE GOT TO FOCUS ON THE
ABILITY AND NOT ON THE
DISABILITY AND WE HAVE SEEN SO
MANY COMPANIES AROUND THE
COUNTRY BENEFIT WHEN THEY GIVE
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES A SHOTT
THIS IS ALL ABOUT.
>> YOABOUT.
>> Woodruff: YOU ARE SAYING IN
THIS REPORT THAT YOU'VE ISSUED
TODAY THAT IT'S NOT ABOUT A
SOCIAL SERVICE ON THE PART OF
EMPLOYERS BUT ABOUT THE BOTTOM
LINE.
EXPLAIN WHAT YOU MEAN BY THAT.
>> ONE OF THE MOST EXCITING
THINGS OF THE LAST YEAR IS
PEOPLE HAVE TOLD US THEY EMPLOY
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES NOT
BECAUSE IT'S CHARITY BUT IT'S IN
THE BEST INTEREST OF THEIR
SHAREHOLDERS.
THEY FOUND PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES HAVE THESE SKILLS,
THEY'RE LOYAL, THEY SHOW UP ON
TIME, THEY'RE DELIGHTED TO HAVE
TOB TURNOVER.
AND SO WHEN YOU HEAR THE C.E.O.
OF A COMPANY LIKE WALGREENS TELL
HIS FELLOW C.E.O.s THAT THAT'S
WHY HE HIRES PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES.
ICE VERY EXCITING AND WE'RE
TRYING TO MAKE SURE THAT
GOVERNORS HAVE ALL THE TOOLS TOS
THAT THEY NEED TO BE SUPPORTIVE
OF BUSINESSES AROUND THE COUNTRY
WHO WANT TO PROVIDE EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY TO PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES.
>> Woodruff: IF THAT'S THE
STORY, WHY AREN'T MORE PEOPLE
BUSINESSES HIRING PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES?
>> WE NEED TO GET THE WORD OUT.
THAT'S NUMBER ONE.
NOT ENOUGH BUSINESSES ARE
HEARING THIS MESSAGE.
THEY DON'T KNOW THERE'S SO MANY
SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLES OF COMPANY
PROSE RIDE ISING THESE
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES TO
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES AND HOW
WELL IT'S WORKING OUT.
THAT'S NUMBER ONE.
NUMBER TWO, STATES HAVE TO DO A
MUCH BETTER JOB.
FOR TOO LONG STATES HAVE
APPROACHED BUSINESSES ASKINGVORE
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES REALLY
AS A CHARITY.
THAT'S NOT WHAT THIS IS ABOUT.
WE HAVE TO CHANGE OUR MIND SETH.
WE HAVE TO RECOGNIZE THAT WE'RE
BUSINESS PARTNERS.
A LOT OF THESE BUSINESSES ARE
LOOKING FOR PEOPLE WITH SKILLS.
WE BRING THOSE PEOPLE -- WE
BRING PEOPLE.
IT COULD BE PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES, IT MIGHT BE PEOPLE
WHO ARE TRADITIONALLY ABLED.
WE HAVE SO MANY OPPORTUNITIES TO
BRING PEOPLE WITH THE NECESSARY
SKILLS AND I THINK THE BETTER WE
DO AS STATES AND THE MORE
BUSINESSES HEAR FROM OTHER
BUSINESS IT IS MORE SUCCESSFUL
WE'LL BE.
>> Woodruff: GOVERNOR, GIVE US
EXAMPLES OF THE KIND OF JOB, THE
KIND OF WORK PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES, EITHER PHYSICAL
DISABILITIES OR INTELLECTUAL
DISABILITIES ARE DOING OR CAN DO
THAT MIGHT SURPRISE OUR
AUDIENCE?
>> THERE IS SUCH A WIDE RANGE.
LET ME GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE: WE
HAVE A COMPANY ACTUALLY IN
DELAWARE BUT IT'S A REGIONAL
I.T. COMPANY, THOUSANDS OF
EMPLOYEES.
THEY'VE COMMITTED OVER THE NEXT
FEW YEARS THAT 3% OF THEIR I.T.
CONSULTANTS WILL BE PEOPLE WITH
AUTISM BECAUSE THEY FOUND THAT
MANY PEOPLE WITH AUTISM ARE
GREAT AT DATA TESTING AND
SOFTWARE QUALITY ANALYSIS.
WE'VE MET EXECUTIVES AT
MICROSOFT AND HIGHMARK INSURANCE
COMPANY WHO ARE DEAF.
WALGREENS IS AN INCREDIBLE
EMPLOYER.
HALF OF THEIR EMPLOYEES AT
DISTRIBUTION CENTERS IN SOUTH
CAROLINA AND CONNECTICUT HAVE A
RANGE OF DISABILITIES.
THAT'S WHY THE FOCUS HAS TO BE
ON THE ABILITY AND NOT THE
DISABILITY.
PEOPLE HAVE SO MANY DIFFERENT
THINGS TO OFFER, BUT SO OFTEN
THESE FOLKS HAVE NOT BEEN GIVEN
A SHOT, WE'RE TRYING TO CHANGE
THAT.
>> Woodruff: BUT YOU'RE NOT
TALKING ABOUT A STATE GOVERNMENT
REQUIRING EMPLOYERS TO DO
SOMETHING, IS THAT RIGHT?
>> NO.
AND THE BEAUTY OF THIS IS IF YOU
TALK TO THESE BUSINESSES, ONCE
THEY GIVE SOME OF THESE FOLKS A
SHOT OF EMPLOYMENT THEY FIND OUT
IT'S IN THE BEST INTEREST OF
THEIR OWN SHAREHOLDERS.
SO THIS IS NOT A REQUIREMENT.
WE BELIEVE WE AS STATES HAVE TO
DO A BETTER JOB OF WALKING THE
WALK AND BEING A MODEL EMPLOYER
OF PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES, BUT
BUSINESSES WILL CHOOSE TO DO IT.
WHEN THEY HAVE THE FACTS,
BUSINESSES WILL CHOOSE TO DO IT
FOR THEIR OWN APPROPRIATE
REASONS, MAINLY WHAT'S IN THE
INTEREST OF THEIR SHAREHOLDERS.
THE OTHER THING WE HAVE TO DO IS
WE HAVE TO DO A MUCH BETTER JOB
OF PREPARING OUR YOUTH WITH
DISABILITIES FOR A LIFETIME OF
EXPECTATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND
NOT FOR A LIFETIME OF
EXPECTATION OF BEING ON PUBLIC
BENEFIT.
>> Woodruff: THAT LEADS TO A
QUESTION I WAS THINKING ABOUT
THAT.
IS WHAT DO YOU THINK IT IS GOING
TO TAKE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH
DISABILITIES IN THIS COUNTRY--
AND, AS YOU SAID, THERE ARE
MILLIONS OF THEM WHO ARE NOT
WORKING-- TO HAVE SOMETHING
CLOSE TO THE OPPORTUNITY THAT
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE ABLE-BODIED
HAVE TO WORK.
>> WELL, PART OF IT IS WE
STATES, GOVERNORS, HAVE TO DO A
BETTER JOB OF REALLY MAKING
DISABILITY EMPLOYMENT PART OF
OUR OVERALL WORK FORCE
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY.
IT'S A CHANGE IN A CULTURAL
MIND-SET AWAY FROM CHARITY AND
MORE TOWARD WHAT'S IN THE BEST
INTEREST OF THE BUSINESSES.
THAT'S NUMBER ONE.
NUMBER TWO, WE HAVE TOE DO A
BETTER JOB OF TALKING TO
BUSINESSES, RECRUITING
BUSINESSES AND HAVING BUSINESSES
HEAR FROM EACH OTHER.
I'M TELLING YOU THAT WHEN A
C.E.O. OF A COMPANY HEARS THE
C.E.O. OF WALGREENS OR THE
C.E.O. OF LOWE'S OR OFFICE MAX
OR U.P.S. TALK ABOUT WHY
EMPLOYING PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES IS RIGHT FOR THEIR
BUSINESS, THEY HEAR THAT.
AND IT'S NOT JUST BIG
BUSINESSES, IT'S MEDIUM-SIZED
BUSINESSES AS WELL.
SO WE THINK THERE'S SEVERAL
DIFFERENT STRATEGIES.
WE'VE ISSUED THIS BLUEPRINT
TODAY THAT'S VERY PRACTICAL IN
NATURE, VERY CONCRETE
SUGGESTIONS, BUT IT DOES START
AS WELL WITH SETTING
EXPECTATIONS FOR OUR YOUNG KIDS
WITH DISABILITIES THAT THEY, IN
FACT, CAN WORK.
THEY WILL WORK.
WE BELIEVE IN THEM, THEY'LL
BELIEVE IN THEMSELVES AND WE
HAVE TO WORK HARD TO MAKE SURE
THOSE OPPORTUNITIES ARE THERE
FOR THEM.
>> Woodruff: GOVERNOR JACK
MARKELL OF DELAWARE, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: NEXT WEEK I'LL
TALK ABOUT A REPORT THAT SHOWS
MANY PEOPLE ARE STILL LIVE IN
INSTITUTIONS WHEN THE LAW CALL
FOR THEM TO BE MOVING INTO A
HOME OR COMMUNITY CARE.
>> Brown: THE U.S. STATE
DEPARTMENT ISSUED A GLOBAL
TRAVEL ALERT TODAY, CITING A
THREAT FROM AL QAEDA.
THE STATEMENT PARTICULARLY
WARNED AMERICAN CITIZENS IN THE
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA.
IT SAID AL QAEDA "MAY FOCUS
EFFORTS TO CONDUCT ATTACKS IN
THE PERIOD BETWEEN NOW AND THE
END OF AUGUST."
EMBASSIES AND CONSULATES WILL
CLOSE 21 EMBASSIES AND
CONSULATES WILL BE CLOSED THIS
WEEKEND IN MOSTLY MUSLIM
NATIONS, STRETCHING FROM WEST
AFRICATO B ANGLADESH, AS A
RESULT OF THE INCREASED THREAT.
MARGARET WARNER HAS BEEN
REPORTING ON THIS ALL DAY AND
JOINS ME NOW.
WELCOME, MARGARET.
WHAT HAVE DO WE KNOW ABOUT HOW
SPECIFIC THE THREAT IS?
>> FIRST WE HAVE TO START TO SAY
THAT THOSE WHO REALLY KNOW
AREN'T TALKING IN DETAIL AND A
LOT OF THOSE TALKING AND
SPECULATING DON'T KNOW.
BUT WE DO KNOW THAT THERE WAS A
LOT OF CREDIBLE -- AN INCREASE
IN CREDIBLE WHAT'S CALLED
"CHATTER" OVER THE LAST WEEK TO
TWO WEEKS.
PERHAPS BOLSTERED BY SOMETHING
VERY SPECIFIC THIS WEEK.
WE DO KNOW IT WAS FAIRLY
SPECIFIC AS TO TIMING, THAT
SOMETHING BIG IS IN THE WORKS AT
THIS TIME PERIOD FROM NOW UNTIL
EARLY NEXT WEEK WHERE THE
EMBASSIES ARE CLOSED AND THROUGH
THE REST OF THE MONTH
POTENTIALLY.
WHAT IS NOT KNOWN, APPARENTLY,
IS LOCATION OR TARGETS.
NOT LOCATION GEOGRAPHIC
NECESSARILY OR TARGETS, BUT THE
THREAT DOES COME FROM OR
CONNECTED TO THE RADICAL
ORGANIZATION, THE JIHADI
ORGANIZATION HEADQUARTERED IN
YEMEN, AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA WHICH AS YOU WILL
RECALL WAS BEHIND THE CHRISTMAS
DAY BOMBER OF 2009, ALSO THE
PLOT TO SEND EXPLOSIVES THROUGH
THE AIR IN 2010.
>> Brown: SO WHAT DOES IT MEAN
FOR THE EMBASSIES AND TRAVELERS
RIGHT NOW?
>> JEFF, FOR EMBASSIES, THEY'RE
NOT SENDING PERSONNEL HOME BUT
IT MEANS THAT SUNDAY-- WHICH
WOULD BE THE START OF THE WORK
WEEK IN THE MUSLIM WORLD, THEY
WILL BE CLOSED.
LOW CAL STAFF WILL COME IN.
NO MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WILL
COME IN.
NOBODY NEEDING A VISA OR WANTING
TO SEE THE CANNES ALREADY A
SECTION.
IN MANY AREAS MANY OF THE STAFF
INSIDE THE COMPOUNDS WON'T COME
OUT.
BUT THESE COMPOUNDS ARE HEAVILY
FORTIFIED AND MANY PEOPLE LIVE
ON -- THEY'RE LIKE A BASE.
AND THOSE PEOPLE MAY GO TO WORK.
WHAT IT MEANS FOR TRAVELERS--
AGAIN, THIS IS NOT A WORLDWIDE
TRAVEL BAN-- BUT WHAT'S CURIOUS
OR INTERESTING TO ME IN THIS
TRAVEL ALERT IS THE FOCUS ON
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS.
TO AVOID PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION,
TO REMEMBER THAT TERRORISTS ARE
GOOD AT ATTACKING SUBWAYS AND
TRAINS AND AIRPLANES.
THAT FOCUS IS WORTH TRAVELERS
TAKING NOTE.
>> Brown: I WANT TO PULL THAT
MAP BACK UP BECAUSE IT'S NOTABLE
WHAT A LARGE AREA THIS IS.
HOW UNUSUAL IS THAT AND WHY SUCH
A LARGE STRETCH?
>> WELL, THE STATE DEPARTMENT
CANNOT THINK OF A PRECEDENT FOR
THIS.
I CAN'T SAY IT'S UNPRECEDENTED,
BUT THEY CAN'T THINK OF ONE.
THIS REFLECTS NOT ONLY AN
ABUNDANCE OF CAUTION, WHICH IS
WHAT THE STATE DEPARTMENT SAYS,
BUT ALSO THE FACT THAT IN THE
LAST TWO YEARS DURING THIS
TURMOIL OF THE ARAB SPRING A LOT
OF THESE DIFFERENT AL QAEDA
WANNABES OR LINKED AFFILIATES--
THAT'S AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA BUT ALSO AL QAEDA IN
NORTHERN AFRICA OR.
AQ.I.M.-- AND ALSO A NEWLY
RESURGENT AL QAEDA ORGANIZATION
FROM IRAQ WHICH IS NOW FIGHTING
IN SYRIA THAT THEY ARE ALL
RESURGENT.
THEY HAVE ALL TAKEN MORE
TERRITORY, THE REGION'S AWASH IN
WEAPONS AND THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF INTERCONNECTION, MORE THAN
THEIR THERE USED TO BE, AMONG
THEM.
FURTHER MORE, YOU HAD PRISON
BREAKS IN BOTH IRAQ AND LIBYA
WHICH HAVE RELEASED ALL THESE
OTHER HARDENED FIGHTERS AND
YOU'VE GOT FOREIGN TPAOEUGERS
POURING INTO PLACES LIKE SYRIA
AND IRAQ AND ALSO THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA.
SO BOTTOM LINE IS U.S.
INTELLIGENCE DOESN'T THINK
THEY'RE ALL BEING DIRECTED BY
SOME MASTER PLOTTER AL QAEDA
CORE BUT THERE IS A BELIEF THAT
THEY'RE NO LONGER THE NEAT
LITTLE SEPARATE FRANCHISES THEY
WERE ONCE THOUGHT TO BE.
>> Brown: AND WATCHING A VERY
WIDE AREA.
MARGARET WARNER, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, A LOOK AT THE
DEBATE OVER EXPORTING COAL
THROUGH THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST.
THE LATEST FIGURES FROM THE
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY SHOW
A RECORD-BREAKING GLOBAL
INCREASE IN C.O.-2 EMISSIONS
LAST YEAR.
COAL ACCOUNTED FOR 44% OF THE
RISE.
BUT IN THE UNITED STATES, DEMAND
FOR COAL IS DROPPING.
AS A RESULT, AMERICAN COMPANIES
ARE LOOKING TO SEND MORE ABROAD.
KATIE CAMPBELL FROM OUR SEATTLE
AFFILIATE KCTS 9 HAS THE STORY.
SHE'S AN EARTHFIX REPORTER
>> Reporter: IT'S THE HEART OF
THE CRAB FISHING SEASON IN THE
SALISH SEA.
THIS NETWORK OF COASTAL
WATERWAYS EXTENDS BOND EYTHE
BORDER OF WASHINGTON STATE INTO
BRITISH COLUMBIA.
IT'S ONE OF THE LARGEST AND MOST
BIOLOGICALLY RICH INLAND SEAS IN
THE WORLD.
JEREMIAH JULIUS IS A FISHERMAN
FROM THE LUMMI TRIBAL COMMUNITY.
THE WHOLE LANDSCAPE IS SACRED TO
US.
THERE'S NOT MUCH CONTAMINANT
FREE LANDS LEFT IN THE UNITED
STATES.
THIS IS ONE OF THEM.
>> Reporter: FOR HUNDREDS OF
GENERATIONS, HIS TRIBE HAS
RELIED ON THE HALIBUT, SALMON
AND CRAB THAT THRIVE IN THESE
WATERS.
>> FISHING IS WHO WE ARE.
FISHING IS OUR CULTURE.
AND TO US, CULTURE IS FISH.
IT'S JUST IN OUR BLOOD.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE'S A STORM
BREWING AT CHERRY POINT, JUST
NORTH OF BELLINGHAM, WASHINGTON.
THIS IS WHERE S.S.A. MARINE
WANTS TO BUILD THE LARGEST COAL
EXPORT TERMINAL IN NORTH
AMERICA.
NEARLY 500 SHIPS WOULD TRAVEL
THESE WATERS EVERY YEAR,
CARRYING COAL TO THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE PACIFIC.
ASIA CONSUMES MORE COAL THAN
REST OF THE WORLD COMBINED.
IN THE NEXT THREE YEARS,
COUNTRIES THERE ARE EXPECTED TO
DOUBLE THE AMOUNT OF COAL THEY
IMPORT TODAY.
THAT SOARING DEMAND SPELLS
OPPORTUNITY FOR U.S. COMPANIES,
ACCORDING TO BOB WATERS,
DIRECTOR OF BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
FOR S.S.A. MARINE.
OUR PARTICULAR PROJECT, GATEWAY
PACIFIC TERMINALS, WHEN BUILT
AND FULLY OPERATIONAL AT FULL
CAPACITY, WOULD GENERATE
APPROXIMATELY $5.5 BILLION IN
FOREIGN MONIES INFUSED BACK INTO
THE U.S. ECONOMY.
>> Reporter: THIS POSSIBILITY
HAS PLACED THE NORTHWEST IN THE
MIDDLE OF A CONTROVERSIAL
DEBATE: SHOULD THE REGION BUILD
EXPORT TERMINALS THAT WOULD OPEN
LUCRATIVE MARKETS FOR THE
WORLD'S DIRTIEST FOSSIL FUEL?
AS THE NATION'S ECONOMY
CONTINUES TO STRUGGLE, CAN THE
COUNTRY AFFORD NOT TO?
GILLETTE, WYOMING LIES IN THE
HEART OF THE NATIONS LARGEST
COAL MINING REGION.
ONE OUT OF EVERY SIX PEOPLE HERE
WORKS FOR THE COAL INDUSTRY.
PEOPLE LIKE PHIL DILLINGER.
MINING HAS PROVIDED A STEADY
SALARY TO SUPPORT HIS FAMILY AND
SEND HIS FOUR CHILDREN TO
COLLEGE.
>> IT'S THAT STABILITY OF
KNOWING THAT EVERY TWO WEEKS I'M
GOING TO GET A PAYCHECK.
AND THAT'S... THAT'S A HUGE,
HUGE THING.
>> Reporter: DILLINGER'S JOB IS
LOADING COAL INTO TRAINS.
>> SO OUR JOB IS BY THE TIME
IT'S DUMPED INTO THAT COAL
HOPPER ALL THE WAY TO THE TIME
WHEN WE LOAD IT ONTO THE TRAINS.
THAT'S COAL PROCESSING.
THAT'S WHAT I DO.
ON AN AVERAGE, IT TAKES A MINUTE
TO A LESS THAN A MINUTE TO FILL
UP ONE CAR.
ONE TRAIN CAR OF COAL.
>> Reporter: THE UNITED STATES
RELIES ON COAL TO PROVIDE ABOUT
40% OF THE NATION'S ENERGY.
BUT IN RECENT YEARS, U.S.
UTILITIES HAVE BEEN SWITCHING
FROM BURNING COAL TO BURNING
NATURAL GAS.
THAT TREND HAS PUSHED U.S. COAL
COMPANIES TO SEARCH CUSTOMERS IN
ASIA.
THE MOST DIRECT PATH WOULD BE TO
SEND COAL TRAS THINROUGH THE
RIVER VALLEYS OF THE NORTHWEST
TO ITS DEEP-WATER PORTS, WHERE
SHIPS CAN COMPLETE DELIVERY TO
ACROSS THE PACIFIC.
THE ONLY OBSTACLE IS THE LACK OF
ADEQUATE COAL EXPORT FACILITIES.
CHERRY POINT IS ONE OF A HANDFUL
OF PLACES IN WASHINGTON AND
OREGON CONSIDERING BUILDING COAL
EXPORT TERMINALS.
THESE FACILITIES WOULD ALLOW
U.S. COAL COMPANIES TO SHIP UP
TO 100 MILLION TONS OF COAL
EVERY YEAR.
IF THESE TERMINALS ARE BUILT,
COMMUNITIES ALONG THE RAILROAD
COULD SEE BETWEEN 18 AND 37
ADDITIONAL COAL TRAINS A DAY.
AND EACH COAL TRAIN CAN STRETCH
A MILE AND A HALF LONG.
SOME SCIENTISTS AND PHYSICIANS
WORRY THAT THESE TRAINS WILL
HAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ON THE
AIR QUALITY AROUND THEM.
PROFESSOR DAN JAFFE IS A LEADIN.
HE'S BEGUN TO TAKE A CLOSER
LOOK.
>> WE STOOD ON THE BRIDGE OVER
THE TRACKS AT RICHMOND BEACH AND
WATCHED A COUPLE DOZEN TRAINS
GOING BY AND WE MEASURED
PARTICULATE MATTER
CONCENTRATIONS THAT WERE WELL
ABOVE THE HEALTH THRESHOLDS.
THE DATA WE HAVE COLLECTED ON
DIESEL AND COAL EXHAUST ON
TRAINS IS VERY PRELIMINARY.
I'D BE DISAPPOINTED TO SEE A
POLICY DECISION GO FORWARD
WITHOUT MORE INFORMATION ON THE
AIR POLLUTION IMPACTS.
>> Reporter: IN 2009, A B.N.S.F.
RAILWAY REPRESENTATIVE TESTIFIED
IN A DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE MEETING
THAT AS MUCH AS 645 POUNDS OF
COAL DUST IS LOST FROM EACH CAR
DURING A 400-MILE JOURNEY.
AND IF A COAL TRAIN USUALLY HAS
ABOUT 125 CARS, THE AMOUNT OF
DUST COULD ADD UP QUICKLY.
B.N.S.F. NOW REQUIRES COMPANIES
THAT SHIP COAL TO APPLY WHAT'S
CALLED SURFACTANT OR A TOPPER
AGENT TO COAL TRAINS BEFORE THEY
LEAVE THE MINES.
THEY SAY THIS HELPS SUPPRESS
DUST BY ABOUT 85%.
PHYSICIANS LIKE MARTIN DONOHOE,
A PORTLAND-BASED PUBLIC HEALTH
ADVOCATE, ALSO WORRY ABOUT THE
DIESEL EXHAUST COMING FROM TRAIN
LOCOMOTIVES.
>> WE KNOW FROM NUMEROUS PEER
REVIEWED POPULATION WIDE STUDIES
THAT THERE IS AN INCREASE IN
ASTHMA EXACERBATION WHEN PEOPLE
ARE EXPOSED TO DIESEL
PARTICULATE MATTER.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO REALIZE THAT
THE PARTICLES FROM THE COAL
TRAINS, THE PARTICLES OF COAL
DUST, THE PARTICLES IN THE
DIESEL MATTER ARE MICROSCOPIC,
ULTRA FINE PARTICLES THAT YOU
CAN'T SEE.
THEY'RE THE ONES THAT DO THE
REAL DAMAGE BECAUSE THEY MAKE IT
TO THE DEEPEST PARTS OF THE
AIRWAYS.
SO YOU MAY NOT BE SEEING IT, BUT
YOU'RE BREATHING IT, AND IT'S
AFFECTING YOU.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE CURRENTLY
THREE COAL TRAINS A DAY THAT
TRAVEL THROUGH THE NORTHWEST UP
TO PORTS IN BRITISH COLUMBIA.
CANADIAN PORTS ARE ALREADY
OPERATING AT NEAR CAPACITY.
THEY TOO WOULD NEED TO EXPAND IN
ORDER TO SHIP MORE COAL ABROAD.
HERE AT THE WESTSHORE TERMINAL
IN BRITISH COLUMBIA ABOUT 1.5
MILLION TONS OF COAL IS WAITING
TO BE SHIPPED TO ASIA.
>> WESTSHORE WAS BUILT IN THE
1970s.
SO THE ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND
REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS ARE
MUCH DIFFERENT THAN THEY ARE
TODAY.
COMPARING WHAT WESTSHORE
TERMINAL IS AND WHAT OUR
TERMINALS ARE GOING TO BE.
ON AN ENVIRONMENTAL BASIS, IT'S
LOOKING AT A 1970 G.T.O. VERSUS
A PRIUS.
>> Reporter: UNLIKE THE
WESTSHORE FACILITY, THE GATEWAY
PACIFIC TERMINAL IS DESIGNED SO
THE COAL WOULD BE COVERED DURING
THE LOADING PROCESS.
>> WE'VE BUILT IN A GREAT DEAL
OF DESIGN ELEMENTS TO PROTECT
THE ENVIRONMENT.
WE HAVE ALL OF OUR CONVEYING
SYSTEMS ON THE TERMINAL COVERED.
ANY CONVEYING SYSTEMS THAT GO
OUT OVER THE WATER ARE ACTUALLY
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED.
WE DON'T THINK IT'S AN EITHER/OR
PROPOSITION.
WE THINK YOU CAN DO BOTH-- THAT
YOU CAN DEVELOP FAMILY WAGE JOBS
AND BE GOOD STEWARDS AND PROTECT
THE ENVIRONMENT.
>> Reporter: FOR JEREMIAH
JULIUS, THE ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS
OUTWEIGH THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS.
>> THEY SAY WE ARE GOING TO LOSE
ALL THESE JOBS AND TAXES IF WE
DON'T ALLOW THIS TO GO IN, WHICH
TO ME IS FALSE BECAUSE YOU CAN'T
LOSE SOMETHING YOU DON'T HAVE.
WE HAVE OUR FISH, WE HAVE OUR
SALMON, WE HAVE CLEAN AIR, WE
WE'LL LOSE THAT.
THAT'S LOSING TO ME.
TO ME, THESE TANKERS ARE THE
TRAINS THAT KILLED OFF THE
BUFFALO.
THESE TANKERS ARE GOING TO KILL
MY WAY OF LIFE, MY FISHING, MY
SO TO ME THIS IS, IT IS A
BATTLE.
>> Reporter: BEFORE ANY OF THE
COAL EXPORT TERMINALS CAN BE
BUILT, THE POTENTIAL
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF THESE
FACILITIES MUST BE STUDIED.
IT'S A PROCESS THAT CAN TAKE
MONTHS, POSSIBLY YEARS.
>> Woodruff: FEDERAL AND STATE
REGULATORS ANNOUNCED THIS WEEK
THAT THEY ARE EXTENDING THE
SCOPE OF THE REVIEW PROCESS AT
CHERRY POINT TO CONSIDER CLIMATE
CHANGE, HUMAN HEALTH AND THE
IMPACTS OF TRANSPORTING COAL BY
RAIL.
FOR THE RECORD, B.N.S.F. RAILWAY
COMPANY IS A "NEWSHOUR"
UNDERWRITER.
>> Brown: WE TURN NOW TO A NEW
PORTRAIT OF HOW AMERICANS VIEW
THEMSELVES AND THEIR ECONOMIC
FUTURES.
RAY SUAREZ HAS OUR LOOK.
>> Suarez: FOR DECADES, WHITE,
HISPANIC AND BLACK AMERICANS
HAVE FELT SIMILARLY OPTIMISTIC
ABOUT THEIR CHANCES OF IMPROVING
THEIR LIVES AND ECONOMIC
PROSPECTS.
BUT A STUDY OUT THIS WEEK
SHOWS THAT SINCE ABOUT 2006,
WHITES HAVE BECOME MORE
PESSIMISTIC.
AT THE SAME TIME, BLACKS AND
HISPANICS HAVE GROWN MORE
OPTIMISTIC.
NOW WE ASK WHY.
JOINING ME ARE MATT BARRETO, A
POLITICAL SCIENCE PROFESSOR AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON AND
CO-FOUNDER OF THE OPINION
RESEARCH GROUP LATINO DECISIONS.
AND ELLIS COSE, THE AUTHOR OF
"THE END OF ANGER: A NEW
GENERATION'S TAKE ON RACE AND
RAGE."
PROFESSOR BARRETO, BY SO MANY
MEASURES, WHITE FAMILIES ARE
DOING BETTER.
YOU KNOW, TAKEN IN THE
AGGREGATE, THE SOCIOECONOMIC
MEASUREMENTS ARE JUST BETTER.
WHY SO MUCH PESSIMISM?
>> WELL, I THINK IT REFLECTS
WHAT WE CALL A CEILING EFFECT,
AND THAT IS THAT WHITES HAVE
BEEN DOING BETTER FOR A VERY
LONG TIME.
YOU CAN GO BACK TO THE
POST-WORLD WAR II ERA WHEN
WHITES REALLY STARTED MOVING
INTO THE SUBURBS AND THE UPPER
MIDDLE CLASS SO THEY'VE OCCUPIED
THAT TOP RUNG OF DOING BETTER
FOR A VERY LONG TIME AND NOW AS
THEY START TO EVALUATE THEIR
POSITION I THINK A LOT OF WHITE
AMERICANS ARE SAYING "WE DON'T
SEE OURS GROWING ANYMORE.
WE'VE BEEN AT THIS TOP RUNG AND
WE'RE NOT GROWING.
INSTEAD WE SEE OTHER GROUPS ARE
ALSO GROWING."
AND THAT LEADS TO A LITTLE BIT
MORE PESSIMISM IN THEIR OWN
REFLECTION OF THEIR GROUP.
THAT PERHAPS THEY'VE ALREADY
ACHIEVED THE HIGHEST RUNG THAT
THEY'RE GOING TO ACHIEVE.
>> Suarez: ELLIS COAST,
CONVERSELY, BLACK AND BROWN
AMERICANS ARE LESS LIKELY TO
HAVE A COLLEGE CREDENTIAL, MORE
LAKELY TO BE UNEMPLOYED.
BY A LOT OF SOCIOECONOMIC
METRIX, JUST DOING WORSE.
HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THE OPTIMISM?
>> EASY.
I WAS SPEAKING WHEN I WAS DOING
RESEARCH TO A GUY NAMED DAVE
THOMAS WHO IS A PROFESSOR AT
HARVARD AND HE USED THE PHRASE
"IRRATIONAL EXUBERANCE" TO
EXPLAIN WHAT WE WERE THEN
PICKING UP IN THE POLLS BECAUSE
THIS POLL FINDING IS NOT NEW.
IT GOES BACK SEVERAL YEARS.
AND IN ESSENCE PART OF IT THAT
WHAT AFRICAN AMERICANS ARE
LOOKING AT AND LATINOS AS WELL
IS ASPIRATIONAL.
THEY'RE LOOKING AT THE FUTURE.
WE'VE GONE, AS MATT BASICALLY
SAID, FROM BEING A COUNTRY THAT
WAS BASICALLY AND TOTALLY
DOMINATED BY WHITES TO SOMETHING
VERY DIFFERENT NOW.
AND SO FOR THE FIRST TIME YOU
HAVE AFRICAN AMERICANS WHO ARE
SAYING IT'S POSSIBLE TO BREAK
THROUGH SOME OF THESE CEILINGS
THAT IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE TO BREAK
THROUGH A GENERATION AGO.
AND WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
THE FUTURE, THE FACT THAT
UNEMPLOYMENT FOR AFRICAN
AMERICANS HAS BEEN ROUGHLY TWICE
WHAT IT IS FOR WHITE AMERICANS,
PRETTY MUCH FOREVER, THAT DOES
NOT AFFECT HOW YOU SEE THE
PROSPECTS FOR YOUR CHILD BECAUSE
YOU SAY MY CHILD MAY BE ABLE TO
BECOME A C.E.O. OF A
CORPORATION.
MY CHILD MAY BE ABLE TO BECOME A
BIG TALK SHOW HOST.
MY CHILD MAY BE ABLE TO BECOME
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
THAT'S SOMETHING YOU COULDN'T
SAY A GENERATION AGO AND THAT'S
REVOLUTIONARY.
>> Suarez: PROFESSOR, IT'S NOT
A FOUR 4%, 5%, 6% DIFFERENCE,
IT'S A HUGE BULGE, 25%, 28%.
DOES THAT NUMBER, THAT BIG
NUMBER DEMAND TO BE LOOKED AT
MORE CLOSELY.
YOU'RE A GUY WHO WORKS WITH
STATISTICS AND SAMPLES AND POLLS
ALL THE TIME.
>> YES, RAY, I THINK ABSOLUTELY
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT PEOPLE
SHOULD BE PAYING ATTENTION TO.
AND AS WE JUST HEARD, THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT THOSE OF US IN
THE RESEARCH COMMUNITY HAVE BEEN
DOCUMENTING FOR A NUMBER OF
YEARS: THAT DECLINE IN WHITE
OPTIMISM AND OPENNESS-- WHICH I
THINK ULTIMATELY IS ALSO TIED TO
THE RISE OF THE TEA PARTY IN
2009 AND 2010-- AND AT THE SAME
TIME WHAT YOU'VE HAD IS YOU'VE
HAD AN INCREASE IN THAT
ASPIRATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR
BLACKS AND HISPANICS.
YOU'VE SEEN A BLACK PRESIDENT
ELECTED, YOU'VE SEEN A LATINA
APPOINTED TO THE UNITED STATES
SUPREME COURT, YOU'VE SEEN ALL
SORTS OF DISCUSSION OF THE BLACK
AND A LATINO VOTE AFTER THE 2012
ELECTION AND THAT MAKES MINORITY
COMMUNITIES FEEL A BIT MORE
EMPOWERED AND OPTIMISTIC.
AT THE SAME TIME, WE'VE SEEN A
STEADY DECLINE OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS OF WHITE AMERICANS IN
TERMS OF HOW THEY VIEW THEIR
FUTURE IN RELATIONSHIP, NOT JUST
TO THEMSELVES BUS IN
RELATIONSHIP TO THIS GROWING
MINORITY COMMUNITY IN THE UNITED
STATES WHICH IS FLEXING ITS
MUSCLE.
NOW I THINK THAT DOES NEED TO BE
DISCUSSED.
>> Suarez: FAMILIES OF ALL
RACES EXPERIENCED TERRIBLE
LOSSES DURING THE WORST OF THE
RECESSION BUT ELLIS COSE, THE
LOSSES AMONG BLACK AND BROWN
FAMILIES WERE BRUTAL.
DOESN'T THE VIEW OF TODAY COLOR
HOW YOU SEE THE FUTURE?
>> WELL, IF YOU LOOK AT PEOPLE
AND YOU ASK THE QUESTION ABOUT
HOW THEIR OWN ECONOMIC SITUATION
IS, BLACKS ARE NO MORE LIKELY
THAN WHITES TO SAY THAT IT'S
GOOD.
IN FACT, THEY'RELESS LIKELY.
BUT IF YOU ASK THE QUESTION IS
THE COUNTRY ON THE RIGHT PATH,
IF YOU ASK THE QUESTION ARE MY
CHILDREN GOING TO DO BETTER?
IF YOU ASK THE QUESTION ARE
PEOPLE LIKE ME AND MY FAMILY
GOING TO DO WELL?
THEN YOU HAVE A DIFFERENT STORY.
A LOT OF THAT IS ABOUT THE
FUTURE.
PART OF WHAT YOU'RE PICKING UP
IS SOMETHING GENERAL RAEUGAL.
MY BOOK LOOKED CLOSELY AT THE
DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENT
GENERATIONS AND THE YOUNGER
GENERATION, THE UNDER 40, UNDER
30 GENERATION SEES A DIFFERENT
AMERICA THAN THE OVER 40, OVER
50 GENERATION SEES.
THEY SEE AN AMERICA THAT'S MORE
OPEN WHERE SUCCESS IS MORE
POSSIBLE.
SO EVEN IF PEOPLE ARE STRUGGLING
NOW-- AND THEY ARE, AND AFRICAN
AMERICANS IF YOU LOOK
OBJECTIVELY HAVE A BIGGER CHANCE
OF FALLING OUT OF THE
MIDDLE-CLASS THAN WHITE
AMERICAN-- SO IT'S BRUTAL BUT IN
TERMS OF WHAT'S POSSIBLE FOR
THEIR CHILDREN AND IN THE FUTURE
YOU GET THESE RESPONSES WHERE
PEOPLE SAY, YOU KNOW, THINGS
AREN'T POSSIBLY THAT WEREN'T
POSSIBLE BEFORE AND THAT TRUMPS
THE PARTICULAR SITUATION MANY
FIND THEMSELVES IN AT THIS
MOMENT.
>> Suarez: PROFESSOR, QUICKLY,
BEFORE WE GO, WHAT NUMBERS WILL
YOU BE LOOKING AT IN THE NEAR
FUTURE TO SEE HOW THESE
QUESTIONS WILL BE TRACKED OVER
TIME?
WHAT WILL BE SIGNIFICANT?
>> WE NOT ONLY WANT TO LOOK AT
HOW EACH INDIVIDUAL GROUP
EVALUATES HAIR OPPORTUNITY BUS
WE SHOULD BE LOOKING AT THE
CROSS PRESSURES HERE.
WE SHOULD BE LOOKING AT HOW
GROUPS ARE MORE WILLING TO WORK
TOGETHER AND TO ADDRESS WHAT YOU
CALLED THE FACTS ON THE GROUND,
THE FACT THAT BLACKS AND LATINOS
STILL DO LAG BEHIND WHITES
DESPITE THE FACT THAT THEY'RE
MORE OPTIMISTIC TODAY, THEY'RE
LAGGING BEHIND.
WE WANT TO SEE ALL GROUPS
WORKING TOGETHER TO MAKE SURE WE
CAN IMPROVE THE ECONOMY AND THE
SITUATION FOR ALL AMERICANS.
>> Suarez: MATT BARRETO, ELLIS
COSE, THANK YOU BETH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AND TO THE ANALYSIS
OF BROOKS AND MARCUS.
"NEW YORK TIMES" COLUMNIST DAVID
BROOKS AND WASHINGTON POST
COLUMNIST RUTH MARCUS.
MARK SHIELDS IS OFF TODAY.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
LET'S GO BACK TO THE LEAD STORY
TONIGHT: JOBS REPORT.
DAVID, 162,000 JOBS CREATED IN
JULY.
THEY -- THAT WAS ADDED, BUT
IT'SLESS THAN WHAT WAS EXPECTHE
ECONOMY?
>> I THINK THERE'S A CONSENSUS
GROWING BOTH ON LEFT AND RIGHT
THAT THE STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS ARE
BECOMING SUPER OBVIOUS.
SO WHEN THIS RECESSION START ADD
NUMBER OF YEARS AGO YOU HAD 63
OUT OF 100 AMERICANS IN THE
LABOR FORCE, NOW WE'RE DOWN,
FEWER THAN IN -- THAN WHEN THE
RECESSION STARTED.
SO THAT SUGGESTS WE'VE GOT DEEP
STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS.
IT PROBABLY HAS A LOT TO DO WITH
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE, COMPANIES
ARE NOT HIRING HUMAN BEINGS,
THEY'RE HIRE MAGANES.ZI
IT PROBABLY HAS TO DO WITH A
SKILLS SHORTAGE, THAT AS
TECHNOLOGY INCREASES SKILLS HAVE
TO KEEP UP AND SKILLS ARE NOT
KEEPING UP.
IT HAS TO DO WITH SOCIOLOGICAL
CHANGES, MEN DROPPING OUT OF THE
LABOR FORCES.
WOMEN, ESPECIALLY YOUNG WOMEN
NEVER ENTERING THE LABOR FORCE
AND SO THESE ARE DEEP STRUCTURAL
CHANGES.
AND I THINK THERE'S A CONSENSUS
GROWING THAT SOMETHING
FUNDAMENTAL HAS SHIFTED IN THE
ECONOMY AND I WOULDN'T SAY
ANYBODY IN THE POLITICAL ARENA
HAS MUCH OF A SET OF SOLUTIONS
THE WAY THEY DID IN THE
PROGRESSIVE ERA, THE NEW DEAL
ERA, EVEN THE REAGAN ERA THAT
ARE COMMENSURATE WITH THE SIZE
OF THIS PROBLEM.
>> Woodruff: SO HOW MUCH
REASON FOR DISCOURAGEMENT, RUTH?
>> I'M NOT GOING TO BE MS. ROSY
TO DAVID'S PESSIMISTIC SCENARIO.
THIS WAS ANOTHER LIMPING MONTH
AND A LIMPING RECOVERY AND HERE
ARE SOME NUMBERS TO JUST KIND OF
UNDERSCORE THAT.
THE HAMILTON PROJECT AT THE
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION LOOKED AT
JOB GROWTH AND SAID IF WE ADDED
208,000 JOBS-- WHICH, OF COURSE,
IS WAY BETTER THAN WE DID THIS
MONTH-- IF WE ADDED 208,000 JOBS
A MONTH IT WOULD TAKE US UNTIL
APRIL, 2020 TO JUST GET US BACK
TO THE PLACE THAT WE WERE IN
DECEMBER, 2007, WHEN THES ME
BEGAN.
AND SO THAT JUST GIVES YOU A
MEASURE OF THE DAUNTINGNESS AND
YOU LOOK NOT JUST AT THE --
EVERYBODY LOOKS AT 7.2%, THE NEW
UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURE IS DOWN A
LITTLE BIT.
BUT LET'S TAKE A LOOK AT THE
TOTAL UNEMPLOYMENT PICTURE.
THE DISCOURAGED WORKERS, THE
LESS -- THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE JUST
STOPPED LOOKING FOR WORK.
THE PEOPLE WHO AREN'T WORKING AS
HARD AS THEY WOULD LIKE TO, AS
MANY HOURS AS THEY'D LIKE TO.
THAT'S 14% OF THE LABOR FORCE.
I THINK DAVID'S TOTALLY RIGHT
WHEN HE TALKS ABOUT HOW WE NEED
TO SORT OF GET TO SOME REALLY
STRUCTURAL SOLUTIONS.
AND THE THING THAT'S SO
DISAPPOINTING IS THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT A POLITICAL SYSTEM
THAT DOESN'T SEEM CAPABLE OF
ACHIEVING THAT.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU GET TO
STRUCTURAL SOLUTIONS?
THE PRESIDENT HAD A
RECOMMENDATION THIS WEEK FOR
CHANGING THE CORPORATE TAX RATE.
HE SAID THIS WAS ONE WAY TO
CREATE JOBS FOR THE MIDDLE
CLASS.
IS THAT THE KIND OF THING?
>> WELL, THAT'S A GOOD THING.
I MEAN, CHANGING THE CORPORATE
TAX RATE, OUR CORPORATE TAXES
ARE TOO HIGH, UNREALISTIC,
THEY'RE INTERNATIONALLY
COMPETITIVE, WE SHOULD CHANGE
THEM.
AND HE WANTS TO TAKE THAT MONEY
PRODUCED AND SHIFT IT TO
INFRASTRUCTURE AND THAT'S ALSO
NEEDED AND SO THERE ARE SMALL
STEPS IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION, I
SUPPOSE.
BUT YOU WOULDN'T SAY THEY'RE
COMMENSURATE WITH THE SIZE OF
THE PROBLEM.
NOW, WE'VE GOT DECADES-LONG
PROBLEMS OF WAGE STAGNATIONS,
WIDENING INEQUALITY, JUST
GIGANTIC PROBLEMS AND WHEN I
LOOK AT WHAT THE PRESIDENT IS
PROPOSING AND WHAT THE
REPUBLICANS ARE PROPOSING,
THEY'RE SMALL.
AND I DON'T THINK THEY'RE AS
BIG.
AND I DENT BLAME THEM, BY THE
WAY.
THEY'RE IN OFFICE, THEY'RE BUSY.
IT'S NOT THEIR JOB TO COME UP
WITH A GIGANTIC AGENDA.
>> BUT ISN'T THIS A PRIORITY?
WHOSE JOB IS IT?
>> WELL, IT IS THEIR JOB.
AND JUST -- THERE'S NO HUGE MEGA
SILVER BULLET STEP.
THERE ARE A WHOLE SET OF SMALL
THINGS CAN THAT CAN HELP AND SO
JOB RETRAINING, MONEY FOR
COMMUNITY COLLEGES, LET'S START
SOME INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS,
THE PRESIDENT PROPOSED ALL OF
THIS AND I THINK YOU'RE BEING
TOO EVEN HANDED IN YOUR "WELL,
THERE AREN'T LARGE IDEAS ON THE
-- AMONG DEMOCRAT FORCE
REPUBLICANS."
THE PRESIDENT PUT OUT THIS
PROPOSAL WHICH, YOU KNOW, LOOK,
IT WASN'T A GRAND BARGAIN, IT
WAS A MINI BARGAIN.
A LOT OF IT WAS RECYCLED FROM
PROPOSALS HE HAD PREVIOUSLY
DONE, BUT IT OFFERED SOMETHING
THAT REPUBLICANS IN A RATIONAL
WORLD OUGHT TO HAVE ACCEPTED: A
LOWER CORPORATE TAX RATE, WHICH
WOULD BE TERRIFIC FOR BUSINESS
AND THE ECONOMY AND FOR JOB
CREATION AND SOME SHORT-TERM
SPENDING.
LANDED WITH  THUAD.
NO POSSIBILITY.
>> SO I THINK I'M BEING NOT EVEN
HANDED ENOUGH, AS USUAL.
(LAUGHTER)
AS USUAL.
>> Woodruff: DO WE GET CREDIT
FOR BEING EVEN HANDED AROUND
HERE?
>> DAVID DOES!
>> THE REPUBLICANS, TO THEIR
CREDIT, HAVE DONE -- HAVE
SUGGESTED A BUNCH OF BIG
FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURAL REFORMS,
WHETHER IT'S A BIG COMPREHENSIVE
TAX THING THAT DAVE CAMP IN THE
HOUSE IS WORKING ON, WHETHER
IT'S A BIG ENTITLEMENT REFORM
THAT PAUL RYAN IS TALKING ABOUT.
IF YOU WANT TO TALK ABOUT ONE OF
THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS IT'S
THAT WE'VE HAD ENTRENCHED
INSTITUTIONS STRANGLING POLICY
MAKING INCREASINGLY FOR 30 OR 40
YEAR.
AND TO CLEAR THAT AWAY YOU NEED
BIG STRUCTURAL REFORMS AND I
THINK A BIG TAX REFORM, A BIG
ENTITLEMENT REFORM WOULD BE AT
LEAST GIGANTIC THINGS THAT WOULD
PUT US A LITTLE WAY IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION.
I THINK REPUBLICANS DESERVE SOME
CREDIT FOR SOME OF THAT.
>> GIGANTIC BUT WRONG BUT WE CAN
CONTINUE THIS ARGUMENT LATER.
>> Woodruff: IS THAT DANCING
AROUND THE EDGES OR DO YOU AGREE
THOSE COULD MAKE A DIFFERENCE IF
THEY COULD GET THE DEMOCRATS?
>> NOBODY WOULD BE MORE EXCITED
THAN ME TO HAVE A SERIOUS
NATIONAL CONVERSATION ABOUT
FUNDAMENTAL TAX REFORM.
IF THERE'S SOMETHING TO FAULT
THE PRESIDENT ON IN THIS
CORPORATE PROPOSAL IT'S THAT WE
NEED TO ADDRESS INDIVIDUAL TAXES
AS WELL.
AND I WOULD LOVE TO HAVE A
SERIOUS CONVERSATION ABOUT
ENTITLEMENT REFORM.
I'M NOT SURE I THINK PAUL RYAN'S
APPROACH -- IT'S BIG BUT IT MAY
NOT BE THE BEST WAY OR THE MOST
ECONOMICALLY SOUND WAY TO DO IT.
MORALLY SOUND.
>> Woodruff: BUT ALL THIS IS
HAPPENING WHILE CONGRESS, TODAY,
HAS LEFT TOWN.
THEY'RE GONE FOR MORE THAN A
MONTH.
>> FIVE WEEKS.
>> Woodruff: THEY WON'T BE
BACK UNTIL SEPTEMBER, DAVID.
WHAT DOES THIS SAY ABOUT -- OR
WHERE DOES THIS LEAVE THE BIG
UNANSWERED QUESTIONS OUT THERE
ABOUT GOVERNMENT SPENDING, ABOUT
THE DEBT LIMIT?
WE COULD GO ON AND ON.
IMMIGRATION.
>> WELL, JUST TO CONTINUE THE
THEME, THE SINGLE-BIGGEST GROWTH
ITEM IN WASHINGTON RIGHT NOW IS
THE IMMIGRATION BILL.
THE IMMIGRATION BILL WHICH
ACCORDING TO THE CONGRESSIONAL
BUDGET OFFICE, ACCORDING TO DOUG
HOLZ-EAKIN WOULD PRODUCE
GIGANTIC SIGNIFICANT INCREASES
BOTH IN REVENUE, IN GROWTH, IN
JOB CREATION.
AND SO THAT IS THE BIGGEST THING
WE HAVE OUT IN FRONT OF US.
AND YOU HAVE TO SAY AS THEY
LEAVE TOWN THE MOVEMENT ABOUT
IMMIGRATION REFORM IS NOT
PROMISING.
AND SO THAT'S BOTH A PROBLEM--
BECAUSE WE CAN'T SOLVE THE
PROBLEM-- BUT IT'S ALSO A
RESULT.
AND SOMEBODY MENTIONED IN
ANOTHER PIECE, THE STAGNATION
HAS CREATED A POLITICAL
FRACTURING OF THE COUNTRY AND A
POLARIZATION OF THE COUNTRY AS
PEOPLE ARE UPSET ABOUT THEIR
STAGNANT OSPEPRCTS AND THAT'S
PRODUCED A POLITICAL
POLARIZATION WHICH THEN MAKES IT
EVEN HARDER TO FIX THE PROBLEM
PEOPLE ARE ANGRY ABOUT.
>> I'M VERY WORRIED ABOUT THE
FALL.
WE HAD SOME GREEN SHOOTS OF
HOPE, ESPECIALLY ON THE SENATE
SIDE PASSING COMPREHENSIVE
IMMIGRATION BILL, PULLING BACK
FROM THE NUCLEAR CLIFF AND
GETTING SOME -- >> Woodruff:
OVER CONFIRMATION.
>> BUT THEN WE GOT TO THE HOUSE
AN WON'T DO
COMPREHENSIVE IMMIGRATION
REFORM.
THE HOUSE THIS WEEK, WE SAW THE
AMAZING SPECTACLE THAT IT WON'T
-- IT CAN'T PASS SPENDING BILLS
AT THE LOW LEVEL THAT IT AGREED
TO BECAUSE IT'S NOT ENOUGH
SPENDING AND IT CAN'T GET A
MAJORITY OF REPUBLICANS TO AGREE
TO CUT SPENDING THAT MUCH.
SO IT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THE RYAN BUDGET IN THEORY AND
THE RYAN BUDGET IN PRACTICE.
SO THE -- SO WHAT WE'RE FACING
WHEN WE COME BACK IN SEPTEMBER
IS TWO THINGS: REALLY PRETTY
QUICKLY.
FIRST OF ALL WE'RE GOING TO NEED
TO PASS A CONTINUING RESOLUTION
TO KEEP THE GOVERNMENT
FUNCTIONING PAST SEPTEMBER 30.
IF YOU CAN'T GET AGREEMENT ON
THESE SPENDING BILL WHICH IS
OUGHTN'T TO BE TERRIBLY
CONTROVERSIAL HOW WILL YOU GET
AGREEMENT ON WHAT LEVEL?
NOBODY WANTS A SHUT DOWN --
WELL, A FEW PEOPLE WANT IT.
THEN, TO SPEAKING OF SANITY, WE
HAVE THE DEBT CEILING COMING UP
AND THE QUESTION OF WHAT IS
GOING TO BE HELD HOSTAGE TO GET
AN INCREASE ME THE DEBT CEILING.
>> Woodruff: AND THE MIDDLE OF
ALL THIS, FUNDING THE
PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE.
BUT WHAT ARE THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
TO THINK, DAVID, AS THEY LOOK AT
WASHINGTON RIGHT NOW?
IS IT JUST DESPAIR?
IS THERE ANY RAY OF --
>> WE'VE BEEN PRETTY UPBEAT THE
LAST EIGHT MINUTES OR SO.
YOU KNOW, IT -- MY BASIC VIEW IS
WASHINGTON REFLECTS THE COUNTRY.
I THINK MEMBERS ARE RESPONDING
REASONABLY RATIONALLY TO THE
INCENTIVE STRUCTURE THEY'RE
GIVEN GIVEN THEIR CONSTITUENTS
AND SO THE COUNTRY BOTH
FRACTURED AND EXCESSIVELY
DISTRUSTFUL, NOT WILLING TO
COMPROMISE AND SO I ALWAYS BLAME
THE COURY ANTS MUCH AS I BLAME
WASHINGTON.
>> NOW YOU'RE BEING UNFAIR TO
THE ENTIRE COUNTRY!
MY GOODNESS!
I ACTUALLY THINK -- WELL, I
THINK WASHINGTON, THE PARTS OF
WASHINGTON ARE BETTER THAN ITS
PRODUCT.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE WHO
ARE WORKING REALLY HARD TO TRY
TO SOLVE THESE PROBLEMS BUT,
YES, THE COUNTRY FRACTURED AND
IT DISAGREES.
WASHINGTON IS REFLECTING ITS
INDIVIDUAL DISTRICTS IN THE
HOUSE.
BUT THE COUNTRY WANTS WASHINGTON
TO FIX THESE PROBLEMS.
IT UNDERSTANDS IT'S NOT AN EASY
SOLUTION, IT'S TIRED OF THE
BICKERING AND IT WANTS IT TO
STOP.
WHETHER IT'S WILLING TO PUNISH
THE PEOPLE ARE PREVENTING IT
FROM STOPPING AND UNWILLING TO
COMPROMISE IS ANOTHER STORY.
BUT, BOY --
>> I'M BEING EXCESSIVELY KIND TO
THE COUNTRY.
>> NOW YOU'RE BEING TOO AMERICA.
>> Woodruff: WE HAVE TO FIGURE
OUT HOW WHO'S NICER TO THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
COMPLETE CHANGE OF SUBJECT.
POPE FRANCIS THIS WEEK, DAVID,
MADE NEWS ON THE PLANE BACK TO
ROME FROM HIS TRIP TO SOUTH
AMERICA TALKING ABOUT SEXUALITY,
TALKING ABOUT GAYS AND SAYING
"WHO AM I TO JUDGE IF SOMEONE
CHOOSES -- OR HAPPENS TO BE
GAY."
THE CHURCH DOCTRINE ISN'T
CHANGING.
DOES THAT CHANGE ANYTHING?
>> I ONCE SAW A MASS ON T.V.,
POPE JOHN PAUL II AND THE T.V.
REPORTER GOT UP AFTERWARD AND
SAID "NOTHING NEW HERE."
THE POPE'S JOB IS NOT TO BE NEW.
THAT'S NOT HIS JOB.
SO I THINK WHAT YOU'RE SEEING IS
A LITTLE EMPHASIS IN HOW
INTERESTED THEY ARE IN SOME OF
THESE ISSUES.
BUT CHURCH DOCTRINE IS NOT GOING
TO CHANGE AND THE POPE'S NOT
THIS CHARGE OF THAT.
>> I AM TEMPTED TO SAY "WHO ARE
WE TO JUDGE?"
BUT SINCE THAT'S OUR JOB, THERE
WAS A SIGNIFICANT AND I THINK
VERY WELCOME CHANGE IN TONE, A
HUMILITY, AN ACCEPTANCE, AN
OPENNESS.
HOMOSEXUALITY IS A SIN IN THE
EYES OF THE CHURCH, IN THE EYES
OF THIS POPE AND HIS PREDECESSOR
BUT I THINK A LITTLE BIT OF
KINDNESS AND HUMILITY GOES A
LONG WAY IN COLUMNIST INS AS
WELL AS IN POPES.
>> Woodruff: IT EVEN WORKS
HERE AT THE NEWSHOUR, RIGHT HERE
ON FRIDAY NIGHTS.
DAVID BROOKS, RUTH MARCUS, GREAT
TO HAVE YOU BOTH.
>> THANKS.
>> Woodruff: THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, NEW
RESEARCH THAT COULD LEAD US ALL
IN A DIFFERENT DIRECTION.
IN JUNE, A 213-FOOT LUXURY YACHT
SAILED IN INTERNATIONAL WATERS
OFF THE SOUTHERN COAST OF ITALY,
WHEN SUDDENLY, UNBEKNOWNST TO
THE CREW, IT VEERED OFF-COURSE.
BUT THIS WAS NO SINISTER ACT
WORTHY OF A SPY FLICK.
INSTEAD, A TEAM OF RESEARCHERS
FROM UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT
AUSTIN HAD DELIBERATELY COERCED
THE $80 MILLION VESSEL FROM ITS
TRACK, WITHOUT PHYSICALLY TAKING
THE HELM.
WITH THE BLESSING OF THOSE
ABOARD, PROFESSOR TODD
HUMPHREY'S AND HIS GRADUATE
STUDENTS EMPLOYED A TECHNIQUE
CALLED G.P.S. SPOOFING TO
EFFECTIVELY DISORIENT THE SHIP'S
POSITIONING SYSTEM.
CHANGES WENT UNDETECTED BY
ALARMS, AND THE AUTOPILOT SYSTEM
SHIFTED THE YACHT TO WHAT IT
THOUGHT WAS THE ORIGINAL COURSE,
NOT ONE SELECTED BY HUMPHREY'S
TEAM.
THE DEMONSTRATION WAS THE FIRST
TO SHOW G.P.S. SPOOFING COULD
POSE A REAL THREAT TO THE
WORLD'S CIVILIAN MARITIME
INDUSTRY.
AND A YEAR EARLIER, THE TEXAS
RESEARCH GROUP SHOWED THE SAME
DANGER ALSO EXISTS IN THE
CIVILIAN AEROSPACE SECTOR.
THEY SUCCESSFULLY USED THEIR
G.P.S. SPOOFING SYSTEM TO
COMMANDEER AN UNMANNED AERIAL
VEHICLE ON U.T.'S CAMPUS.
AND REPEEDLYAT BROUGHT THE
SMALL, HELICOPTER-LIKE DRONE TO
THE GROUND BY ALTERING
INFORMATION SENT TO ITS ALTITUDE
NAVIGATION SYSTEM.
AND TODD HUMPHREYS, THE
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS RESEARCHER
BEHIND THESE PROJECTS JOINS US
NOW.
ALSO WITH US IS MILTON CLARY.
HE WORKS WITH FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES TO IDENTIFY SUCH
THREATS.
HE'S A SENIOR ANALYST AT
OVERLOOK SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGIES.
SO TODD HUMPHRIES, THIS HAS A
KIND OF INNOCUOUS FUNNY EVEN
NAME OF SPOOFING BUT IT SOUNDS
RATHER SERIOUS.
YOU'RE, IN ESSENCE -- YOU'RE
TRICKING THE G.P.S. SYSTEM?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
WE CONVINCINGLY FAKED THE G.P.S.
SIGNALS AND MAKE A RECEIVER
THINK IT'S AT SOME OTHER PLACE
OR SOME OTHER TIME.
>> Brown: WHY DO IT?
WHAT'S BEHIND THIS
EXPERIMENTING?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, WE HAD DONE
EXPERIMENTS IN OUR LABORATORY
AND WE'D CONVINCED OURSELVES
THAT WE COULD HACK A G.P.S.
RECEIVER, MAKE IT BELIEVE IT'S
SOME OTHER PLACE, BUT WHAT DOES
THIS MEAN?
WHAT DOES IT ENTAIL?
COULD YOU, FOR EXAMPLE, REMOTELY
AND CLANDESTINELY LEAD AN
EXPENSIVE AND ENORMOUS SHIP AT
SEA OFF COURSE WITHOUT THE CREW
EVEN KNOWING?
THAT WAS THE QUESTION WE SOUGHT
TO ANSWER AND IT TURNS OUT THE
ANSWER IS YES.
>> Brown: HOW DO YOU VIEW THIS
SPOOFING?
HOW DO YOU THINK ABOUT IT?
>> WELL, SPOOFING IS CERTAINLY A
REAL PHENOMENON AND ESSENTIALLY
SPOOFING IS JUST BEING A VERY
BELIEVLE LABIE THAT THE RECEIVER
GETS DOWN AND THINK IT'S GETTING
DATA FROM THE SATELLITE BUT IN
EFFECT THINK OF IT AS JUST THIS
IS THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND SOMEONE
HAS SWITCHED ALL THE STREET
SIGNS AROUND.
YOU THINK YOU'RE ON THE RIGHT
STREET BUT YOU'RE REALLY NOT.
>> Brown: WHY IS IT -- WHY ARE
THESE KINDS OF EXPERIMENTS --
I'LL ASK YOU THE SAME QUESTION.
WHY IS IT INTERESTING?
WHY IS IT IMPORTANT?
>> IT'S IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT CAN BE DONE SO WE CAN IN
TURN LEARN HOW TO PREVENT IT
FROM BEING DONE.
AND THERE ARE CAPABILITIES FOR
THE LAST SEVERAL YEARS THERE'S
BEEN NATIONAL POLICY TO DEVELOP
CAPABILITIES TO PRECLUDE THESE
TYPES OF -- BASICALLY THREATS TO
SPOOFING.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY CERTAIN
ELEMENTS WITHIN THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT HAVE SORT OF BEEN A
CHIHUAHUA IN A CHINA SHOP WHEN
IT COMES TO ACTUALLY GETTING THE
WORK DONE.
>> Brown: WELL, WHAT KIND OF
-- WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT WHAT'S
VULNERABLE AND WHAT'S NOT, WHAT
KINDS OF THINGS ARE BOUND BY A
G.P.S. SYSTEM?
>> WELL, WHEN YOU CONSIDER WHAT
G.P.S. DOES, PEOPLE THINK OF IT
AS, YOU KNOW, HOW FAR AM I TO
THE GREEN?
OR HOW DO I GET TO THE LOCAL
SHOPPING CENTER?
BUT G.P.S. IS EMBEDDED IN SO
MUCH OF OUR CRITICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE.
ALL OUR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
DEPENDING ON THE TIMING FROM
G.P.S., ALL THE EMERGENCY
RESPONDERS RELY ON G.P.S.
EMERGENCY 911.
IF YOU DIALED THAT ON YOUR
TELEPHONE IT WILL SHOW THE
OPERATOR RIGHT WHERE YOU ARE
BASED ON THE G.P.S. IN YOUR
PHONE.
IF THAT GETS -- IF G.P.S. GOES
AWAY OR GETS SPOOFED THAT COULD
BE VERY DISRUPTIVE.
ALL OUR GROUND TRANSPORTATION,
WATER TRANSPORTATION, RAIL
TRANSPORTATION, POSITIVE TRAIN
CONTROL WHICH IS A VERY
IMPORTANT THING TO THE FEDERAL
RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION TO KNOW
WHERE THESE TRAINS ARE AND WHERE
THEY ARE IN TIME.
>> Brown: TODD HUMPHRIES, HOW
HARD IS IT TO DO OR EASY TO DO?
YOU USED THE WORD "HACKING."
IS THAT WHAT IT'S ABOUT?
IS IT THE PROVERBIAL HACKER, THE
TEENAGER, WHO CAN DO THIS OR
WHAT?
>> IT IS A KIND OF HACKING
ATTACK BUT I WOULDN'T EXPECT A
TEENAGEER TO DO WHAT WE'VE DONE.
IT TOOK A TEAM OF ABOUT FOUR
Ph.D. STUDENTS SEVERAL YEARS
TO COME UP WITH THE BOX WE
DEVELOPED THAT CAN CONVINCINGLY
FAKE THESE GENERAL YES, SIR
SIGNALS.
THE REAL WORRY I HAVE IS THAT
SOMEONE WHO IS PERHAPS NOT A
Ph.D. COULD OPERATE A BOX LIKE
WE HAVE.
SO IF THE SOFTWARE EVER GOT OUT
ON TO THE INTERNET OR IF SOMEONE
ELSE REPLICATED THE BOX THEN IT
WOULDN'T TAKE A P.H.D. TO RUN
THE THING.
>> Brown: SO PICK UP ON THIS
REQUEST WHERE OF WHERE THE
VULNERABILITIES ARE AND USING
THE RESEARCH YOU'VE BEEN DOING,
HOW WOULD ONE PROTECT THOSE?
>> WELL, WE'VE BEEN LOOKING INTO
PROTECTIONS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
TEXAS, CORNELL UNIVERSITY,
STANFORD, MANY OTHER AGENCIES
ACROSS THE GLOBE.
WHAT WE'VE FOUND OVER THE LAST
COUPLE YEARS IS THAT THE MOST
PRACTICAL PROTECTIONS ARE ALSO
THE LEAST EFFECTIVE AND THE
LEAST EXPENSIVE AND SO FORTH.
BUT TIM PRACTICAL, SOMEWHAT
CUMBERSOME PROTECTIONS ARE THE
MOST EFFECTIVE.
SO WE HERE IN A BIT OF A
CONUNDRUM RIGHT NOW BUT I'M
HOPING THAT WITHIN A COUPLE
YEARS WE'LL FIND A SWEET SPOT,
WE'LL IMPLEMENT SOMETHING THAT
EFFECTIVELY DEFENDS AND DOESN'T
BREAK THE BANK.
>> Brown: BUT YOUR FEELING IS
THAT AT THIS MOMENT IT'S
IMPORTANT TO TALK ABOUT, TO DO
THE RESEARCH, TO MAKE IT PUBLIC
PRECISELY TO GET TO THAT NEXT
STEP?
>> I THINK SO.
I THINK WE'VE WAITED LONG ENOUGH
FOR SOLUTIONS TO COME ABOUT ON
THEIR OWN.
NOW IT'S TIME TO GO TO THE
PUBLIC, TO EXPOSE THE PROBLEM,
AND GET MORE PEOPLE THINKING
ABOUT IT.
>> Brown: MILTON CLARY, I KNOW
YOU DO A LOT OF WORK WITH THE
DEPARTMENT.
WHEN YO YOU WERE TALKING ABOUT E
VARIOUS VULNERABILITIES, HOW
MUCH IS IT IN THE MILITARY?
>> WELL, THE MILITARY G.P.S. IS
A COMPLETELY DIFFERENT SYSTEM
THAN WHAT THE CIVILIANS USE.
IT HAS A MUCH MORE SOPHISTICATED
SIGNAL STRUCTURE AND A IN ITSELF
IS EMBEDDED IN A VERY
SOPHISTICATED ENCRYPTION.
SO TO BE ABLE TO GET INTO THE
SIGNAL AND FOOL IT, YOU CAN'T
EVEN GET THERE.
IT'S -- TO REALLIES ME WITH IN
THE THE WAY THAT DR. HUMPHRIES
HAS DONE.
NOW, AS FAR AS TRYING TO GIVE
OURSELVES SOME RESILIENCE, ONE
OF THE BIGGEST USES OF G.P.S. IS
NOT THE POSITION DATA BUT THE
TIMING INFORMATION.
AND THERE'S COUNTRIES -- UNITED
KINGDOM, JAPAN AND KOREA ALL
HAVE A SYSTEM CALLEDDED LORAN,
AN AMERICAN INVESTIGATION SYSTEM
THAT GOES BACK TO THE '40s AND
THEY'RE BUILDING AN ENHANCED
LORAN THAT WILL PROVIDE TIMING
SYSTEMS AS A BACKUP AND THAT
WOULD BE VERY, VERY DIFFICULT TO
JAM.
>> Brown: SO COUNTRIES,
COMPANIES, EVERYBODY'S WATCHING
THIS RIGHT NOW.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE THAT
CARE ABOUT IT OR WORK IN IT PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION.
>> Brown: FASCINATING STUFF.
MILTON CLARY, TODD HUMPHREY,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
I ENJOYED BEING HERE.
CARRY.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE U.S. ECONOMY ADDED 162,000
JOBS IN JULY, NOT AS MANY AS
EXPECTED.
AND THE STATE DEPARTMENT ISSUED
A GLOBAL TRAVEL ALERT FOR
AMERICANS, CITING A THREAT FROM
AL QAEDA.
A NOTE BEFORE WE GO.
LAST NIGHT, WE INTERVIEWED
MICHAEL CHERTOFF ABOUT OUTGOING
FBI DIRECTOR ROBERT MUELLER.
WE SHOULD HAVE SAID FOR THE
RECORD THAT CHERTOFF IS CHAIRMAN
OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR
B.A.E. SYSTEMS, A "NEWSHOUR"
UNDERWRITER.
>> Brown: ONLINE, LEON PANETTA
KWAME HOLMAN TEL US LSMORE.
>> Holman: RAY TALKED TO FORMER
C.I.A. DIRECTOR AND DEFENSE
SECRETARY.
PANETTA TODAY ABOUT HOW ROBERT
MUELLER HELPED TRANSFORM THE
FBI, AND THE INCREASING
AND PAUL SOLMAN HAS MORE ON
TODAY'S JOBS NUMBERS INCLUDING
THAT'S ON MAKING SENSE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON MONDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT MAJOR
LEAGUE BASEBALL'S NEGOTIATIONS
TO PENALIZE PLAYERS THAT DOPED.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
"WASHINGTON WEEK" CAN BE SEEN
LATER THIS EVENING ON MOST
PBS STATIONS.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE MONDAY EVENING.
HAVE A NICE WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOODNIGHT.